docs(blog): add 1tb challenge on a laptop post (#9487)
ibis-project/ibis: docs/posts/1tbc/index.qmd

---
title: "Querying 1TB of data in Python on a laptop"
author: "Cody Peterson"
date: "2024-07-01"
image: ibis-duckdb-sort.gif
categories:
    - benchmark
    - duckdb
    - datafusion
    - polars
---

***TPC-H benchmark at `sf=1024` via DuckDB, DataFusion, and Polars on a MacBook
Pro with 96GiB of RAM.***

---

> pandas requires your dataframe to fit in memory. Out-of-memory (OOM) errors are

Author: since OOM is used later, it's good convention to spell out the acronym on the first use

        "size_gb": "size (GB on-disk in compressed Parquet files)",
        "size_gb_mem": "size (approximate GB in memory)",
    },
    # color="size_gb",
    # color_continuous_scale="viridis",
)

print(
    f"total size: {tmp['size_gb'].sum().to_pyarrow().as_py():,.2f}GBs (compressed Parquet files)"
)
c
```

In-memory this would be about 1TB. Uncompressed CSV files would be >1TB on disk.

Let's explore the largest table, `lineitem`. This table in memory is ~6X larger
than RAM.

```{python}
#| code-fold: true
#| code-summary: "Show code to explore the lineitem table"
sf = 1
n = 1
data_dir = f"tpch_data/parquet/sf={sf}/n={n}"

table_name = "lineitem"
data = f"{data_dir}/{table_name}/*.parquet"

t = ibis.read_parquet(data)
print(f"rows: {t.count().to_pyarrow().as_py():,} | columns: {len(t.columns)}")
```

Over 6 billion rows!

Let's try to display the first few rows with Ibis, pandas, and Polars:

::: {.panel-tabset}

## Ibis

```{python}
t = ibis.read_parquet(data)
t.head(3)
```

## pandas

```{.python}
df = pd.concat([pd.read_parquet(f) for f in glob.glob(data)], ignore_index=True) # <1>
df.head(3)
```

1. Work around lack of reading multiple parquet files in pandas

> ```html

Author: why it's `html`? I don't think it needs to be `html` specifically, but it's to show the output of the (Juptyer) kernel crashing -- what you get if you try to run this

> ```html

Reviewer: I see, makes sense!

The Kernel crashed while executing code in the current cell or a previous cell.
Please review the code in the cell(s) to identify a possible cause of the failure.
Click here for more info.
View Jupyter log for further details.
```

## Polars (eager)

```{.python}
df = pl.read_parquet(data)
df.head(3)
```

```html
The Kernel crashed while executing code in the current cell or a previous cell.
Please review the code in the cell(s) to identify a possible cause of the failure.
Click here for more info.
View Jupyter log for further details.
```

## Polars (lazy)

```{python}
df = pl.scan_parquet(data)
df.head(3).collect()
```

## Polars (lazy, streaming)

```{python}
df = pl.scan_parquet(data)
df.head(3).collect(streaming=True)
```

:::

Ibis (DuckDB backend by default) can display the first few rows. Polars (lazy)
can handle this in regular and streaming mode. pandas and Polars (eager) crash

> the kernel as they must load all the data into memory to construct their

Reviewer: It's not the kernel that's crashing. If that happened, you'd be in a much worse situation. The kernel's OOM-killer (or the equivalent thing on macOS) is killing a misbehaving process.

Reviewer: I see that kernel means "Jupyter kernel" here. I think since you're talking about running out of memory, referring to "Jupyter kernel" specifically will be more clear.

> dataframes. Since this table is at ~6X larger than our 96GiB of RAM, we can't

Reviewer: ```suggestion
dataframes. Since this table is about ~6X larger than our 96GiB of RAM, we can't
```

Not sure if that should be `at least` perhaps?

load it all.

> For lazily computed Python dataframes, an underlying query engine can determine
> the potential subset of data that needs to be read into memory for a given

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For lazily computed Python dataframes, an underlying query engine has the opportunity
to determine a subset of data to be read into memory that satisfies a given
```

query. For example, to display any three rows from the `lineitem` table it can
just read the first three rows from the first Parquet file in the dataset.

:::{.callout-tip title="Visualize the Ibis expression tree" collapse="true"}

```{python}
#| code-fold: true
#| code-summary: "Show code to visualize the Ibis expression tree"
from ibis.expr.visualize import to_graph

to_graph(t.head(3))
```

:::

Let's try something more challenging: sorting the `lineitem` table. This forces
at least some columns from all rows of data to pass through the query engine to
determine the top 3 rows per the specified ordering. Since the data is larger
than RAM, only "streaming" engines can handle this. We'll try with the methods

> that worked on the previous query and add in the DataFusion backend for Ibis.

Reviewer: This is an example of a place where [partial sorting](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Partial_sorting) is useful (you only need to put the first K elements in order, not all N), not if that's worth linking to or not.

]

comparisons = {f"{x}_v_{y}": x_vs_y(piv, x, y) for x, y in comparisons}

piv2 = piv.mutate(**comparisons)
piv2 = piv2.order_by("query_number").relocate("query_number", systems)

agg3 = (
    agg2.group_by("system")
    .agg(
        queries_completed=agg2["avg_execution_seconds"].count(),
        execution_seconds=agg2["avg_execution_seconds"].sum().round(2),
        seconds_per_query=agg2["avg_execution_seconds"].mean().round(2),
    )
    .order_by("system")
)
agg3
```

`ibis-duckdb` completed 22/22 queries **in under 30 minutes**. If you need to
run batch data jobs on a similar amount of data, a laptop might be all you need!

`ibis-datafusion` only completed 17/22 queries, though recall [3 are failing due
to a bug that's already been
fixed](../ibis-bench/index.qmd#failing-datafusion-queries). A new Python release
for DataFusion hasn't been made yet, so we ran with the old version. Assuming
those queries would complete, only 2 queries would be failing due to lack of
memory. More investigation would be needed to determine the work needed for all
22 queries to pass under these conditions.

`polars-lazy` only completed 14/22 queries, with 8 failing due lack of memory.

> The [new streaming engine coming
> soon](https://pola.rs/posts/announcing-polars-1/#new-engine-design) will likely

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [new streaming engine](https://pola.rs/posts/announcing-polars-1/#new-engine-design) will likely
```

Probably best to avoid timelines here.

        )
    )
    .tab_source_note(
        source_note=md(
            "Benchmark results source data (public bucket): `gs://ibis-bench/1tbc/cache/file_id=*.parquet`"
        )
    )
    .fmt_percent(list(comparisons), decimals=2, scale_values=True)
    .data_color(
        columns=systems,
        domain=[0, agg2["avg_execution_seconds"].max().to_pyarrow().as_py()],
        palette=color_palette,
        na_color=na_color,
    )
    .data_color(
        columns=list(comparisons),
        domain=[
            min(
                [piv2[c].min().to_pyarrow().as_py() for c in list(comparisons)],
            ),
            max(
                [piv2[c].max().to_pyarrow().as_py() for c in list(comparisons)],
            ),
        ],
        palette=color_palette,
        na_color=na_color,
    )
)
tbl
```

You can use the code above to further explore and visualize the results.

## Why does this matter?

The ability to run all 1TB TPC-H queries on a relatively standard laptop with
minimal setup represents a significant shift in the Python data ecosystem.

### Scale up, then scale out

> While distributed OLAP query engines will have their place, the threshold for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While distributed OLAP query engines have their place, the threshold for
```

considering them against a single-node OLAP query engine has been raised
drastically over the last few years. You can [see how much DuckDB has improved
over the years](https://duckdb.org/2024/06/26/benchmarks-over-time) and it shows
in this benchmark.

It's a good idea to start with a single node and see how far you can get. You'll
need to consider the tradeoffs for your own situation to make a decision. With
Ibis, you can write your queries once and try them on different engines to see
which is best for your workload.

### Composable data systems are here

Ibis separates the query from the engine. It translates dataframe code into an

> intermediary representation (IR) in the backend's native language -- often SQL,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
intermediate representation (IR) in the backend's native language -- often SQL,
```

author: "Cody Peterson"
date: "2024-07-08"
image: ibis-duckdb-sort.gif
categories:
    - benchmark
    - duckdb
    - datafusion
    - polars
---

***TPC-H benchmark at `sf=1024` via DuckDB, DataFusion, and Polars on a MacBook
Pro with 96GiB of RAM.***

---

pandas requires your dataframe to fit in memory. Out-of-memory (OOM) errors are
common when working on larger datasets, though the corresponding size of data on
disk can be surprising. The creator of pandas and Ibis noted in ["Apache
Arrow and the '10 Things I Hate About
pandas'"](https://wesmckinney.com/blog/apache-arrow-pandas-internals):

> To put it simply, **we weren’t thinking about analyzing 100 GB or 1 TB datasets
> in 2011**. [In 2017], my rule of thumb for pandas is that **you should have 5 to
> 10 times as much RAM as the size of your dataset**. So if you have a 10 GB
> dataset, you should really have about 64, preferably 128 GB of RAM if you want
> to avoid memory management problems. This comes as a shock to users who expect
> to be able to analyze datasets that are within a factor of 2 or 3 the size of
> their computer’s RAM.

Today with Ibis you can reliably and efficiently process a 1TB dataset on a

> laptop with <1/10th the RAM.

Reviewer: Perhaps worth stating this as 100x **LESS** RAM than recommended by Wes as opposed to 1/10th?

Please review the code in the cell(s) to identify a possible cause of the failure.
Click here for more info.
View Jupyter log for further details.
```

![CPU/RAM while Polars with the lazy API sorting](polars-lazy-sort.gif)

## Polars (lazy, streaming)

```{.python}
df = pl.scan_parquet(data)
(
    df.sort(pl.col("l_orderkey"), pl.col("l_partkey"), pl.col("l_suppkey"))
    .head(3)
    .collect(streaming=True)
)
```

```html
PanicException: called `Result::unwrap()` on an `Err` value: "SendError(..)"
```

See [GitHub
issue](https://github.com/pola-rs/polars/issues/17289#issuecomment-2200469528).

![CPU/RAM while Polars with the lazy API, streaming engine sorting](polars-lazy-streaming-sort.gif)

:::

:::{.callout-tip title="Visualize the Ibis expression tree" collapse="true"}

```{python}
#| code-fold: true
#| code-summary: "Show code to visualize the Ibis expression tree"
from ibis.expr.visualize import to_graph

to_graph(t.order_by(t["l_orderkey"], t["l_partkey"], t["l_suppkey"]).head(3))
```

:::

Ibis with the DuckDB and DataFusion backends complete this in about 2 minutes
each. Polars (lazy) crashes the kernel after about 2 minutes with its default

> mode and panicks in streaming mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
mode and panics in streaming mode.
```

**Streaming is an overloaded term here**. In the context of Ibis, a streaming
backend refers to a near real-time data processing engine like [Apache
Flink](https://ibis-project.org/backends/flink) or
[RisingWave](https://ibis-project.org/backends/risingwave). In the context of
Polars, streaming is a separate engine from the default that can handle
larger-than-memory data. This general paradigm is already used by DuckDB and
DataFusion, hence their ability to complete the above query. [The Polars team
does not recommend using their current streaming engine for
benchmarking](https://github.com/pola-rs/polars/issues/16694#issuecomment-2146668559)
and has [announced a new version of their streaming
engine](https://pola.rs/posts/announcing-polars-1/#new-engine-design).

As we'll see in the benchmark result, some queries will fail to complete with
Polars and DataFusion. These queries are killed by the operating system due to a
lack of memory.

> :::{.callout-tip title="Sampling large datasets with Ibis" collapse="true"}

Reviewer: I think this might be missing a closing `:::`

Author: it's on line 399, this is a long collapsed example of how to sample w/ Ibis and use pandas or Polars downstream

:::

## 1TB TPC-H benchmark results

Let's delve into the results of benchmarking ~1TB (`sf=1024`) TPC-H queries on a
laptop.

:::{.callout-important title="Not an official TPC-H benchmark"}
This is not an [official TPC-H benchmark](https://www.tpc.org/tpch). We ran a
derivate of the TPC-H benchmark.
:::

:::{.callout-warning title="Key differences from previous benchmarking"}
See [the prior benchmark post](../ibis-bench/index.qmd) for more details and key
considerations. Key differences in this iteration include:

1. `polars-u64-idx` was used instead of `polars`
2. [Some Polars queries were
 updated](https://github.com/lostmygithubaccount/ibis-bench/pull/5)
3. Parquet files were generated with `n=128` partitions
    - this was done to avoid OOM errors when generating the data
    - this should have little impact on the query execution time
4. Queries 18 and 21 for Polars, 9 and 18 for DataFusion were skipped
    - they ran for a very long time without completing or failing
    - the prior benchmark indicates these queries would likely eventually fail

The Python package versions used were:

- `ibis-framework==9.1.0`
- `datafusion==38.0.1`
- `duckdb==1.0.0`

> - `polars-u64-idx==1.0.0`

Reviewer: I see that you're using polars 1.0.0 now. Disregard the other comment!

    ) * (
        (
            (piv[x] - piv[y])
            / ibis.ifelse(
                piv[y] > piv[x],
                piv[x],
                piv[y],
            )
        ).abs()
    ).round(4)

comparisons = [
    ("ibis-datafusion", "ibis-duckdb"),
    ("polars-lazy", "ibis-datafusion"),
    ("polars-lazy", "ibis-duckdb"),
]

comparisons = {f"{x}_v_{y}": x_vs_y(piv, x, y) for x, y in comparisons}

piv2 = piv.mutate(**comparisons)
piv2 = piv2.order_by("query_number").relocate("query_number", systems)

agg3 = (
    agg2.group_by("system")
    .agg(
        queries_completed=agg2["avg_execution_seconds"].count(),
        execution_seconds=agg2["avg_execution_seconds"].sum().round(2),
        seconds_per_query=agg2["avg_execution_seconds"].mean().round(2),
    )
    .order_by(ibis.desc("queries_completed"))
)
agg3
```

`ibis-duckdb` completed all 22/22 queries **in under 30 minutes**. If you need
to run batch data jobs on a similar amount of data, a laptop might be all you
need!

`ibis-datafusion` only completed 17/22 queries, though recall [3 are failing due
to a bug that's already been
fixed](../ibis-bench/index.qmd#failing-datafusion-queries). A new Python release

> for DataFusion hasn't been made yet, so we ran with the old version. Assuming

Reviewer: I just updated this in https://github.com/ibis-project/ibis/pull/9506, so probably should re-run.

Author: I already ran with it (just `pip install --upgrade datafusion`, but the bug fix needed isn't in `39.0.0`. it was merged a bit after, so need the next release. I would like to have that but can do a follow-up

Reviewer: Yep, sounds good!

those queries would complete, only 2 queries would be failing due to lack of
memory. More investigation would be needed to determine the work needed for all
22 queries to pass under these conditions.

> `polars-lazy` only completed 13/22 queries, with 8 failing due lack of memory.

Author: this is with the Polars API directly, not through Ibis

> `polars-lazy` only completed 13/22 queries, with 8 failing due lack of memory.

Reviewer: Right, I just figured you're probably running this all in the same environment, so you'd be using not-polars-1.0.

> `polars-lazy` only completed 13/22 queries, with 8 failing due lack of memory.

Reviewer: I see you're using 1.0.0 (https://github.com/ibis-project/ibis/pull/9487/files#diff-e9501d7da1f1123ec145f264f145ad135e499bdd034e6a795651fcc51cadc177R430)
